README.md, before:

# url-pattern

[![NPM Package](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/url-pattern.svg?style=flat)](https://www.npmjs.org/package/url-pattern)
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/snd/url-pattern.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/snd/url-pattern/branches)
[![Sauce Test Status](https://saucelabs.com/buildstatus/urlpattern)](https://saucelabs.com/u/urlpattern)
[![codecov.io](http://codecov.io/github/snd/url-pattern/coverage.svg?branch=master)](http://codecov.io/github/snd/url-pattern?branch=master)
[![Downloads per Month](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/url-pattern.svg?style=flat)](https://www.npmjs.org/package/url-pattern)

**easier than regex string matching patterns for urls and other strings.  
turn strings into data or data into strings.**

> This is a great little library -- thanks!  
> [michael](https://github.com/snd/url-pattern/pull/7)

[make pattern:](#make-pattern-from-string)
``` javascript
var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users(/:id)');
```

[match pattern against string and extract values:](#match-pattern-against-string)
``` javascript
pattern.match('/api/users/10'); // {id: '10'}
pattern.match('/api/users'); // {}
pattern.match('/api/products/5'); // null
```

[generate string from pattern and values:](#stringify-patterns)
``` javascript
pattern.stringify() // '/api/users'
pattern.stringify({id: 20}) // '/api/users/20'
```

- continuously tested in Node.js (0.12, 4.2.3 and 5.3) and all relevant browsers:
  [![Sauce Test Status](https://saucelabs.com/browser-matrix/urlpattern.svg)](https://saucelabs.com/u/urlpattern)
- [tiny single file with just under 500 lines of simple, readable, maintainable code](src/url-pattern.coffee)
- [huge test suite](test)
  passing [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/snd/url-pattern.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/snd/url-pattern/branches)
  with [![codecov.io](http://codecov.io/github/snd/url-pattern/coverage.svg?branch=master)](http://codecov.io/github/snd/url-pattern?branch=master)
  code coverage
- widely used [![Downloads per Month](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/url-pattern.svg?style=flat)](https://www.npmjs.org/package/url-pattern)
- supports CommonJS, [AMD](http://requirejs.org/docs/whyamd.html) and browser globals
  - `require('url-pattern')`
  - use [lib/url-pattern.js](lib/url-pattern.js) in the browser
  - sets the global variable `UrlPattern` when neither CommonJS nor [AMD](http://requirejs.org/docs/whyamd.html) are available.
- very fast matching as each pattern is compiled into a regex exactly once
- zero dependencies
- [customizable](#customize-the-pattern-syntax)
- [frequently asked questions](#frequently-asked-questions)
- npm package: `npm install url-pattern`
- bower package: `bower install url-pattern`
- pattern parser implemented using simple, combosable, testable [parser combinators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parser_combinator)
- [typescript typings](index.d.ts)

[check out **passage** if you are looking for simple composable routing that builds on top of url-pattern](https://github.com/snd/passage)

```
npm install url-pattern
```

```
bower install url-pattern
```

```javascript
> var UrlPattern = require('url-pattern');
```

``` javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/v:major(.:minor)/*');

> pattern.match('/v1.2/');
{major: '1', minor: '2', _: ''}

> pattern.match('/v2/users');
{major: '2', _: 'users'}

> pattern.match('/v/');
null
```
``` javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('(http(s)\\://)(:subdomain.):domain.:tld(\\::port)(/*)')

> pattern.match('google.de');
{domain: 'google', tld: 'de'}

> pattern.match('https://www.google.com');
{subdomain: 'www', domain: 'google', tld: 'com'}

> pattern.match('http://mail.google.com/mail');
{subdomain: 'mail', domain: 'google', tld: 'com', _: 'mail'}

> pattern.match('http://mail.google.com:80/mail');
{subdomain: 'mail', domain: 'google', tld: 'com', port: '80', _: 'mail'}

> pattern.match('google');
null
```

## make pattern from string

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users/:id');
```

a `pattern` is immutable after construction.  
none of its methods changes its state.  
that makes it easier to reason about.

## match pattern against string

match returns the extracted segments:

```javascript
> pattern.match('/api/users/10');
{id: '10'}
```

or `null` if there was no match:

``` javascript
> pattern.match('/api/products/5');
null
```

patterns are compiled into regexes which makes `.match()` superfast.

## named segments

`:id` (in the example above) is a named segment:

a named segment starts with `:` followed by the **name**.  
the **name** must be at least one character in the regex character set `a-zA-Z0-9`.

when matching, a named segment consumes all characters in the regex character set
`a-zA-Z0-9-_~ %`.
a named segment match stops at `/`, `.`, ... but not at `_`, `-`, ` `, `%`...

[you can change these character sets. click here to see how.](#customize-the-pattern-syntax)

if a named segment **name** occurs more than once in the pattern string,
then the multiple results are stored in an array on the returned object:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users/:ids/posts/:ids');
> pattern.match('/api/users/10/posts/5');
{ids: ['10', '5']}
```

## optional segments, wildcards and escaping

to make part of a pattern optional just wrap it in `(` and `)`:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern(
  '(http(s)\\://)(:subdomain.):domain.:tld(/*)'
);
```

note that `\\` escapes the `:` in `http(s)\\://`.
you can use `\\` to escape `(`, `)`, `:` and `*` which have special meaning within
url-pattern.

optional named segments are stored in the corresponding property only if they are present in the source string:

```javascript
> pattern.match('google.de');
{domain: 'google', tld: 'de'}
```

```javascript
> pattern.match('https://www.google.com');
{subdomain: 'www', domain: 'google', tld: 'com'}
```

`*` in patterns are wildcards and match anything.
wildcard matches are collected in the `_` property:

```javascript
> pattern.match('http://mail.google.com/mail');
{subdomain: 'mail', domain: 'google', tld: 'com', _: 'mail'}
```

if there is only one wildcard then `_` contains the matching string.
otherwise `_` contains an array of matching strings.

[look at the tests for additional examples of `.match`](test/match-fixtures.coffee)

## make pattern from regex

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern(/^\/api\/(.*)$/);
```

if the pattern was created from a regex an array of the captured groups is returned on a match:

```javascript
> pattern.match('/api/users');
['users']

> pattern.match('/apiii/test');
null
```

when making a pattern from a regex
you can pass an array of keys as the second argument.
returns objects on match with each key mapped to a captured value:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern(
  /^\/api\/([^\/]+)(?:\/(\d+))?$/,
  ['resource', 'id']
);

> pattern.match('/api/users');
{resource: 'users'}

> pattern.match('/api/users/5');
{resource: 'users', id: '5'}

> pattern.match('/api/users/foo');
null
```

## stringify patterns

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users/:id');

> pattern.stringify({id: 10})
'/api/users/10'
```

optional segments are only included in the output if they contain named segments
and/or wildcards and values for those are provided:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users(/:id)');

> pattern.stringify()
'/api/users'

> pattern.stringify({id: 10})
'/api/users/10'
```

wildcards (key = `_`), deeply nested optional groups and multiple value arrays should stringify as expected.

an error is thrown if a value that is not in an optional group is not provided.

an error is thrown if an optional segment contains multiple
params and not all of them are provided.
*one provided value for an optional segment
makes all values in that optional segment required.*

[look at the tests for additional examples of `.stringify`](test/stringify-fixtures.coffee)

## customize the pattern syntax

finally we can completely change pattern-parsing and regex-compilation to suit our needs:

```javascript
> var options = {};
```

let's change the char used for escaping (default `\\`):

```javascript
> options.escapeChar = '!';
```

let's change the char used to start a named segment (default `:`):

```javascript
> options.segmentNameStartChar = '$';
```

let's change the set of chars allowed in named segment names (default `a-zA-Z0-9`)
to also include `_` and `-`:

```javascript
> options.segmentNameCharset = 'a-zA-Z0-9_-';
```

let's change the set of chars allowed in named segment values
(default `a-zA-Z0-9-_~ %`) to not allow non-alphanumeric chars:

```javascript
> options.segmentValueCharset = 'a-zA-Z0-9';
```

let's change the chars used to surround an optional segment (default `(` and `)`):

```javascript
> options.optionalSegmentStartChar = '[';
> options.optionalSegmentEndChar = ']';
```

let's change the char used to denote a wildcard (default `*`):

```javascript
> options.wildcardChar = '?';
```

pass options as the second argument to the constructor:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern(
  '[http[s]!://][$sub_domain.]$domain.$toplevel-domain[/?]',
  options
);
```

then match:

```javascript
> pattern.match('http://mail.google.com/mail');
{
  sub_domain: 'mail',
  domain: 'google',
  'toplevel-domain': 'com',
  _: 'mail'
}
```

## frequently asked questions

### how do i match the query part of an URL ?

the query part of an URL has very different semantics than the rest.
url-pattern is not well suited for parsing the query part.

there are good existing libraries for parsing the query part of an URL.
https://github.com/hapijs/qs is an example.
in the interest of keeping things simple and focused
i see no reason to add special support
for parsing the query part to url-pattern.

i recommend splitting the URL at `?`, using url-pattern
to parse the first part (scheme, host, port, path)
and using https://github.com/hapijs/qs to parse the last part (query).

### how do i match an IP ?

you can't exactly match IPs with url-pattern so you have to
fall back to regexes and pass in a regex object.

[here's how you do it](https://github.com/snd/url-pattern/blob/c8e0a943bb62e6feeca2d2595da4e22782e617ed/test/match-fixtures.coffee#L237)

## [contributing](contributing.md)

## [license: MIT](LICENSE)

Commit message:

Document syntax for named wildcards

README.md, after:

# url-pattern

[![NPM Package](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/url-pattern.svg?style=flat)](https://www.npmjs.org/package/url-pattern)
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/snd/url-pattern.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/snd/url-pattern/branches)
[![Sauce Test Status](https://saucelabs.com/buildstatus/urlpattern)](https://saucelabs.com/u/urlpattern)
[![codecov.io](http://codecov.io/github/snd/url-pattern/coverage.svg?branch=master)](http://codecov.io/github/snd/url-pattern?branch=master)
[![Downloads per Month](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/url-pattern.svg?style=flat)](https://www.npmjs.org/package/url-pattern)

**easier than regex string matching patterns for urls and other strings.  
turn strings into data or data into strings.**

> This is a great little library -- thanks!  
> [michael](https://github.com/snd/url-pattern/pull/7)

[make pattern:](#make-pattern-from-string)
``` javascript
var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users(/:id)');
```

[match pattern against string and extract values:](#match-pattern-against-string)
``` javascript
pattern.match('/api/users/10'); // {id: '10'}
pattern.match('/api/users'); // {}
pattern.match('/api/products/5'); // null
```

[generate string from pattern and values:](#stringify-patterns)
``` javascript
pattern.stringify() // '/api/users'
pattern.stringify({id: 20}) // '/api/users/20'
```

- continuously tested in Node.js (0.12, 4.2.3 and 5.3) and all relevant browsers:
  [![Sauce Test Status](https://saucelabs.com/browser-matrix/urlpattern.svg)](https://saucelabs.com/u/urlpattern)
- [tiny single file with just under 500 lines of simple, readable, maintainable code](src/url-pattern.coffee)
- [huge test suite](test)
  passing [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/snd/url-pattern.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/snd/url-pattern/branches)
  with [![codecov.io](http://codecov.io/github/snd/url-pattern/coverage.svg?branch=master)](http://codecov.io/github/snd/url-pattern?branch=master)
  code coverage
- widely used [![Downloads per Month](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/url-pattern.svg?style=flat)](https://www.npmjs.org/package/url-pattern)
- supports CommonJS, [AMD](http://requirejs.org/docs/whyamd.html) and browser globals
  - `require('url-pattern')`
  - use [lib/url-pattern.js](lib/url-pattern.js) in the browser
  - sets the global variable `UrlPattern` when neither CommonJS nor [AMD](http://requirejs.org/docs/whyamd.html) are available.
- very fast matching as each pattern is compiled into a regex exactly once
- zero dependencies
- [customizable](#customize-the-pattern-syntax)
- [frequently asked questions](#frequently-asked-questions)
- npm package: `npm install url-pattern`
- bower package: `bower install url-pattern`
- pattern parser implemented using simple, combosable, testable [parser combinators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parser_combinator)
- [typescript typings](index.d.ts)

[check out **passage** if you are looking for simple composable routing that builds on top of url-pattern](https://github.com/snd/passage)

```
npm install url-pattern
```

```
bower install url-pattern
```

```javascript
> var UrlPattern = require('url-pattern');
```

``` javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/v:major(.:minor)/*');

> pattern.match('/v1.2/');
{major: '1', minor: '2', _: ''}

> pattern.match('/v2/users');
{major: '2', _: 'users'}

> pattern.match('/v/');
null
```
``` javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('(http(s)\\://)(:subdomain.):domain.:tld(\\::port)(/*)')

> pattern.match('google.de');
{domain: 'google', tld: 'de'}

> pattern.match('https://www.google.com');
{subdomain: 'www', domain: 'google', tld: 'com'}

> pattern.match('http://mail.google.com/mail');
{subdomain: 'mail', domain: 'google', tld: 'com', _: 'mail'}

> pattern.match('http://mail.google.com:80/mail');
{subdomain: 'mail', domain: 'google', tld: 'com', port: '80', _: 'mail'}

> pattern.match('google');
null
```

## make pattern from string

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users/:id');
```

a `pattern` is immutable after construction.  
none of its methods changes its state.  
that makes it easier to reason about.

## match pattern against string

match returns the extracted segments:

```javascript
> pattern.match('/api/users/10');
{id: '10'}
```

or `null` if there was no match:

``` javascript
> pattern.match('/api/products/5');
null
```

patterns are compiled into regexes which makes `.match()` superfast.

## named segments

`:id` (in the example above) is a named segment:

a named segment starts with `:` followed by the **name**.  
the **name** must be at least one character in the regex character set `a-zA-Z0-9`.

when matching, a named segment consumes all characters in the regex character set
`a-zA-Z0-9-_~ %`.
a named segment match stops at `/`, `.`, ... but not at `_`, `-`, ` `, `%`...

[you can change these character sets. click here to see how.](#customize-the-pattern-syntax)

if a named segment **name** occurs more than once in the pattern string,
then the multiple results are stored in an array on the returned object:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users/:ids/posts/:ids');
> pattern.match('/api/users/10/posts/5');
{ids: ['10', '5']}
```

## optional segments, wildcards and escaping

to make part of a pattern optional just wrap it in `(` and `)`:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern(
  '(http(s)\\://)(:subdomain.):domain.:tld(/*)'
);
```

note that `\\` escapes the `:` in `http(s)\\://`.
you can use `\\` to escape `(`, `)`, `:` and `*` which have special meaning within
url-pattern.

optional named segments are stored in the corresponding property only if they are present in the source string:

```javascript
> pattern.match('google.de');
{domain: 'google', tld: 'de'}
```

```javascript
> pattern.match('https://www.google.com');
{subdomain: 'www', domain: 'google', tld: 'com'}
```

`*` in patterns are wildcards and match anything.
wildcard matches are collected in the `_` property:

```javascript
> pattern.match('http://mail.google.com/mail');
{subdomain: 'mail', domain: 'google', tld: 'com', _: 'mail'}
```

if there is only one wildcard then `_` contains the matching string.
otherwise `_` contains an array of matching strings.

`*:` in a pattern is a named wildcard. the match will be
captured to the corresponding property instead of `_`:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/search/*:term');
> pattern.match('/search/fruit');
{term: 'fruit'}
```

[look at the tests for additional examples of `.match`](test/match-fixtures.coffee)

## make pattern from regex

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern(/^\/api\/(.*)$/);
```

if the pattern was created from a regex an array of the captured groups is returned on a match:

```javascript
> pattern.match('/api/users');
['users']

> pattern.match('/apiii/test');
null
```

when making a pattern from a regex
you can pass an array of keys as the second argument.
returns objects on match with each key mapped to a captured value:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern(
  /^\/api\/([^\/]+)(?:\/(\d+))?$/,
  ['resource', 'id']
);

> pattern.match('/api/users');
{resource: 'users'}

> pattern.match('/api/users/5');
{resource: 'users', id: '5'}

> pattern.match('/api/users/foo');
null
```

## stringify patterns

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users/:id');

> pattern.stringify({id: 10})
'/api/users/10'
```

optional segments are only included in the output if they contain named segments
and/or wildcards and values for those are provided:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern('/api/users(/:id)');

> pattern.stringify()
'/api/users'

> pattern.stringify({id: 10})
'/api/users/10'
```

wildcards (key = `_`), deeply nested optional groups and multiple value arrays should stringify as expected.

an error is thrown if a value that is not in an optional group is not provided.

an error is thrown if an optional segment contains multiple
params and not all of them are provided.
*one provided value for an optional segment
makes all values in that optional segment required.*

[look at the tests for additional examples of `.stringify`](test/stringify-fixtures.coffee)

## customize the pattern syntax

finally we can completely change pattern-parsing and regex-compilation to suit our needs:

```javascript
> var options = {};
```

let's change the char used for escaping (default `\\`):

```javascript
> options.escapeChar = '!';
```

let's change the char used to start a named segment (default `:`):

```javascript
> options.segmentNameStartChar = '$';
```

let's change the set of chars allowed in named segment names (default `a-zA-Z0-9`)
to also include `_` and `-`:

```javascript
> options.segmentNameCharset = 'a-zA-Z0-9_-';
```

let's change the set of chars allowed in named segment values
(default `a-zA-Z0-9-_~ %`) to not allow non-alphanumeric chars:

```javascript
> options.segmentValueCharset = 'a-zA-Z0-9';
```

let's change the chars used to surround an optional segment (default `(` and `)`):

```javascript
> options.optionalSegmentStartChar = '[';
> options.optionalSegmentEndChar = ']';
```

let's change the char used to denote a wildcard (default `*`):

```javascript
> options.wildcardChar = '?';
```

pass options as the second argument to the constructor:

```javascript
> var pattern = new UrlPattern(
  '[http[s]!://][$sub_domain.]$domain.$toplevel-domain[/?]',
  options
);
```

then match:

```javascript
> pattern.match('http://mail.google.com/mail');
{
  sub_domain: 'mail',
  domain: 'google',
  'toplevel-domain': 'com',
  _: 'mail'
}
```

## frequently asked questions

### how do i match the query part of an URL ?

the query part of an URL has very different semantics than the rest.
url-pattern is not well suited for parsing the query part.

there are good existing libraries for parsing the query part of an URL.
https://github.com/hapijs/qs is an example.
in the interest of keeping things simple and focused
i see no reason to add special support
for parsing the query part to url-pattern.

i recommend splitting the URL at `?`, using url-pattern
to parse the first part (scheme, host, port, path)
and using https://github.com/hapijs/qs to parse the last part (query).

### how do i match an IP ?

you can't exactly match IPs with url-pattern so you have to
fall back to regexes and pass in a regex object.

[here's how you do it](https://github.com/snd/url-pattern/blob/c8e0a943bb62e6feeca2d2595da4e22782e617ed/test/match-fixtures.coffee#L237)

## [contributing](contributing.md)

## [license: MIT](LICENSE)
